Okay, it's rolling.
Well, glad to speak with you.
Congratulations on your new book.
Thank you.
And, gee, I guess, I mean, where does one start?
I always like to meet people face-to-face, I have to admit.
But in any case, I mean, do you believe that you've invented a genre?
Let's start with that.
I mean, is this a...
A creature of your creation.
You know, the comic mystery.
I'm really trying to think of anybody else who tests them.
I think... Well, I think that what I've done is sort of moved...
a thing that existed in the movies when I was a kid and started from that.
It was a kind of mystery comedy in the movies, which I don't think existed in books.
Red Skelton did them, Bob Hope did them, a lot of people did them, in which a fumble-footed amateur
gets completely surrounded by mob guys, or spies, or stuff like that, and struggles through to success.
And, you know, Bob Hoven, my favorite brunette, and my favorite spy, and Fred Skelton with the good humor man, and I know there were some others, I can't think of them now.
Not on purpose.
It was sort of looking back afterwards.
I said, oh, so that's where I got it.
When this fog of comedy came over me.
What did you call it, fog?
Yes.
That's fine.
I'm just saving myself some trouble when it comes to transcription, that's all.
Because I began as, you know, just doing it right, you know, doing things.
whodunits and... But conceiving of an actual mystery, of course.
Yeah.
Because this is what, you know, you won all these Golden Dagger Awards and Edgar Awards.
You certainly are abiding by the conventions.
Yes, yes.
Well, I'm sort of... I'm sort of within the conventions while sticking pins in them at the same time.
You know, I don't go off on my own, but...
But for the first few years I was writing, there was nothing comic.
I was just doing books like anybody else.
And then when it happened that what I was doing was sort of playing off the inevitable scenes, what emerged was a kind of novel version of what those movies used to do.
And now I think it's sort of moved beyond that, but that's where it all began.
And now, I don't know.
I mean, you certainly have written, as I know, for the films, for the movies, and have, in fact, even been honored for your contributions.
Do you see these things visually when you're writing them?
Pretty much.
Yeah, I'm kind of a visual writer.
Yeah.
Visual and sound effects.
This thing could easily, this isn't going to be hard.
I mean, if somebody wants to do a movie, it's not going to be too hard to put this thing together, is it?
Well, the problem that I create, though, is I put, I give it too much story and
and too many events and too many characters.
That's never stopped Hollywood.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, I know.
They can do War and Peace.
They can do Anna Karenina.
I'm teasing now.
Sorry.
Go ahead.
Yeah, I wouldn't do it.
I wouldn't adapt my own.
Really?
Yeah.
That's... That way madness lies.
But, of course, you are writing satire, too, I think.
I mean, there are a number of... If you're trying to say...
Well, do you accept that you're a genre writer?
Yes, yes.
It doesn't bother you.
You don't rail at the wind and say, they call me a genre writer or anything.
They don't take me seriously.
Well... I mean, they do take you seriously, but you don't say that they don't.
I did rail at... I mean, I think everybody in this genre rails and says, oh, come on.
But...
two things kind of conspired to stop me from railing.
One is, well, here I am.
I mean, there's no point, you know, if I'm wearing a purple coat, I can't deny it.
And the other thing is that... Good quote, by the way.
I can see... You can see things visually and in sound.
I can see them in type.
But the other thing is that if you...
think about it, the novel, the whole genre of novel, I mean, never mind subgenres within it, but the whole art form.
There's a phrase I'm not going to hear.
I'm not going to say a lot.
Why?
Anyway, the whole novel form is itself less important.
than it was.
There's less prestige to claim that you aren't getting.
You know, I mean, when Fitzgerald and Faulkner and Hemingway were writing, something that they did would be front page news.
There is no writer today who is front page news.
So at that time,
a Dashiell Hammett, who is certainly their peer, would have a legitimate complaint saying just because some of my characters have guns in their hands and they're not shooting at animals doesn't mean I'm a lesser writer.
But today, I wouldn't really feel all that badly to be told that I wasn't thought of as highly as John Irving or
What's that guy, Cormac?
Cormac McCarthy.
I just interviewed John Irving last week, by the way.
I went up to Vermont to this palatial mansion on the mountainside.
I mean, he has a house halfway up a mountain.
It was not bad.
It was pretty nice.
We'll have garb rot.
Anyway, I'm sorry.
Yeah, but, you know, I mean, there's the...
The prestige isn't there for anybody anymore, so why carry on?
I know people who still do carry on, but I don't think there's... I am light of heart about it.
Tell me a couple of things now.
I mean, you didn't start writing this June 13th after O.J.
was arrested.
You didn't bang this thing out in six weeks.
No, no.
I would have kept both gloves in the same place.
Good point.
I mean, it is rather, you talk about celebrities going on trial for murder, you know, and then you think back, how many of them have there been?
I know.
We've been trying to figure that out, and I think that this Simpson thing, somebody...
You know, there's two things.
There's somebody who becomes famous because they're on trial for murder, but somebody who was famous prior to that, I think you have to go back to Fatty Arbuckle.
See, I mean, that doesn't resonate with me.
I mean, I guess I know the case, but it certainly... They'll be talking about this one long after we're gone.
I mean, this Simpson thing is... Fatty Arbuckle was a silent movie star, so that means it's, you know... Yeah, he was big.
Early 20s.
So...
Did he do it, by the way?
Pardon?
Did he do it?
No.
He got off?
No, no, no.
He didn't.
Well, let's see.
His career was ruined.
I think it all wound up sort of in a mess.
I'm not sure he was finally convicted of murdering the girl.
A crime of passion?
Oh, well, if... Yeah, but I'm picking your brains here.
You brought this up.
It certainly isn't that famous.
Well, what happened was that there was some sort of strange party, I mean, a rough party in a hotel in San Francisco, and Arbuckle was there, and...
It was said that this girl, who's a not very successful actress, died because a Coke bottle that was inside her at the time broke.
Oh, Jesus.
So he was accused of inserting it.
And he said he never did, and he didn't even know she was there, and she was in a different room.
He didn't know he was inserting the Coke bottle?
I mean, she didn't know she was there.
No.
Well, there was a certain amount of drugs involved.
I guess, yeah.
Anyway, okay, well, anyway, that's irrelevant, I guess.
At that time, because of the sexual nature of the charges, once the man was charged, he was doomed.
It really didn't matter if he was guilty or innocent or found guilty or innocent.
His career was over.
He went from being the most loved man in America to the most hated man in America.
But anyway, that was the last time.
That was the last time.
70 years, and
So then I do it, and before I can get the book out, you know.
Yeah, but it can't hurt you, I don't think.
No, it's just so bizarre.
It's not a coattail I would have written on on purpose.
No, I quite agree.
It's very strange.
But they sure have it in the publicity letter they sent out, though.
Well, you know.
Sidney Flacco.
Well, listen, you went out to the country music capital.
Now, this is kind of a big deal for you, isn't it?
I mean, you're basically, this is new territory for you, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
Well, yes, but to deal with country music performers and fans, yeah, that's, you know, but the...
Because this is, in a way, it's a sequel to a previous book.
It's not a series.
I certainly hope it's not a series.
But you couldn't let those characters go, could you?
I guess not.
And when I found out about Branson, they seemed like the people to go there.
Because after we went to Branson, my wife called it an irony-free zone.
And...
It just seemed like... I've never heard of a place before, to be honest with you.
It's an amazing place.
3,500 population, 5 million visitors a year.
Jeez.
And no airport.
And, I mean, they're all like making a pilgrimage, right?
Well, they're making a pilgrimage to their past, is what it is.
The people who play there...
are not the hot new ones who are going to come out with a new song or a new record or a new album or a new event any minute now.
They're people whose careers have closed in a funny way.
So they come out and they do their greatest hits.
So it's not like the minor league training ground so much.
It's almost like the old elephant burial ground.
It has been...
has been City.
There was one guy I was talking to there who's very talented and very funny and very nice.
This guy named Jim Stafford.
About 20 years ago, he hit one hit called Spiders and Snakes.
Doesn't do anything for me.
No, I never heard of him.
Well, when I talked to him, he had an 800-seat theater and he was filling it twice a day.
And he has now moved to a bigger theater.
So how do you decide to set a novel there?
Well, when I heard about it and then went and looked at it, I love to put absolutely disparate...
elements together if you put real opposites together you can sometimes get a nice atomic explosion out of it and one of the contrasts has always been and this is a link because the previous book about those people was sort of a National Enquirer takeoff thing and there the contrast between
the people on the paper, the absolutely cynical, heartless, funny, bright, horrible, terrific people on the paper, and the very slow, simple, naive, one-dimensional, sweet members of the audience.
Couldn't be more of a contrast.
And...
And there's something of that in Branson, too, because the stars, the headliners, their active career may be over, you know, but they're still around.
They have their hits.
They have their past glory.
And these people, these five million people a year, they come there to be reminded of something they liked in the past, and they get to like it again.
Is it all year round, or is it just like a season of chicken?
It's sort of growing.
It had gotten up to about six, seven months a year.
Now it's... Let me see.
I think they shut down November and most of December, and now they're picking up again over the Christmas holidays, and then they shut down again until the end of April.
Now, you, as I understand, it spent, what, about five weeks there?
Not quite.
No, I was there three times...
for about a total of about three weeks as well.
And this was largely field research, I gather.
Yeah, yeah.
For ambience and atmosphere and... And I talked with a lot of people, and I talked with some of the
show people, and things like the Ozark Marketing Council.
The Ozark Marketing Council.
Yes, they market the Ozark.
And I went over to the county seat at Forsyth, and I talked to an attorney there who used to be the prosecutor.
And, in fact, there was one thing he told me that I neglected to get into the book.
And now it's too late, and I'm sorry.
And what was that?
Murder trials in Missouri are much shorter than they are in the rest of the world, and that's because the state law requires the attorneys to state their charges ahead of time.
What do you mean?
I mean, you have to do that anyway, don't you?
When you, maybe I'm not understanding.
I mean, when you indict somebody, you state your charges, right?
No, no, no, no.
I mean, the lawyer's, I'm sorry, the lawyer's fees.
Oh, I thought you were talking about the indictment.
No, I didn't mean the criminal charges.
I meant the lawyer's fees.
Oh, the fees.
The lawyer has to say how much his fee is going to be at the beginning, before the trial.
So it's a package deal.
Yeah.
Regardless of how much time it takes.
So it's slam-bam, thank you, ma'am type thing, right?
Right.
A murder trial in Missouri that goes into the second week is a really complex murder trial.
If Shapiro had to say to Simpson, this is going to cost you $4 million, this would be a shorter trial in California.
No.
I think what he told Simpson is how much, first he said, how much are you worth?
And they said $10 million, right?
Yeah.
And that's what it's going to cost.
Right.
I mean, that's it.
That's what happens to the Menendez brothers, right?
The 12 million is gone, so she's gone, too.
Leslie Abramson, the next thing she did was start a fund.
Like, we really care about the goddamn Menendez brothers.
Jesus.
Especially those of us with children, you know?
Parents.
Look at your kids a little different.
But I'll tell you, I have to confess, I can't miss a minute of this O.J.
Simpson thing.
I mean, I admit it.
I have to watch it.
It is at that wonderful story level.
From the beginning, it has been exactly like an old...
Adele paperback mystery novel with the crime map on the back cover.
Exactly.
I've always maintained as an old reporter, you know, I mean, there's nothing beats going to a trial and sitting in day after day.
I mean, I really have the temperament to sit through a whole trial and follow it.
um so i mean this is you know i have covered quite a few trials in my life and it is it is interesting i mean i and i think people are really sucking this up too you know yeah it pretty well has everything yeah um of course you've got you've got the country music and then and then you've got the tabloids which are infecting our lives at a yes at a uh
tremendous pace, and I guess you felt you weren't done with them yet, huh?
Well, I thought I was.
When I finished the first book, I got my hero and heroine out of there and gave them a nice, semi-respectable job on New York Magazine, and so I thought that I've done a lot of books where that was the end of it.
I never saw those characters again, but somehow the
the sweet simplicity of Branson.
You know, Mel Tillis described Branson as being a cross between Vegas and Mayberry.
And that's perfect.
And to put that crowd of people from the galaxy in there.
But then the other thing, once I got started in it,
I got more and more interested in the performers, and there was a piece on 60 Minutes about four years ago, four or five years ago, that Ed Bradley did, and I got a hold of that and watched it.
And a bunch of these guys all play golf together on Wednesday mornings.
This is true retirement village for them, and they love it.
they get to play golf in the morning.
They don't have to get in a goddamn bus and go to another town.
Uh, they, they perform twice a day, afternoon and early evening.
You know, by nine 30, they can have their, their, uh, warm cocoa and go to bed.
You know, they're having a good time.
So anyway, Bradley went out on a, on a golf course with them.
And, uh,
At one point he said, how is this recession that's striking America affecting you?
And they grinned at each other and they grinned at him and they said, what?
He said, yeah, I know.
And, okay, these are not shit kickers.
These are not roofs.
These are very sharp, talented people.
clever people, men and women.
And that became, from the very beginning, that became a part of what the book was about, that the guy, Ray Jones, my country singer guy, would be the sharpest guy in the book, you know, except for my girl Sarah.
But he would be dubious and imaginative and sharp and
and let everybody else underestimate him.
That was fun to do that, to find a real hero there.
Yeah.
Describe your world for me.
I mean, your characters do seem to come.
He is kind of outside.
He may be perceived by some to be a rule, but he's a pretty sophisticated character.
But generally speaking, I'm not just talking about this novel in general.
You seem to have a particular kind of character that you write about.
So you can just take it anywhere you want.
I'm just looking for some quotes here.
I think my characters, well, like the people, I guess.
I mean, they're certainly not in the upper, you know, they're not in the patrician ranks, let's put it that way.
No, no, and they're not...
happily integrated into the society.
They're not functioning cogs in the machine.
They tend to be a little off one way or another.
Mao said that the revolutionary is the fish who swims in the ocean of the people.
They're some kind of weird fish that does that, too, without the revolutionary context or content.
But, yeah, they've always, well, which is what I've always been in the mystery field, too.
I've always been sort of the weirdo, the antibody within the mystery field.
You've been most comfortable writing about New York, I gather.
I can't say I've read the whole shelf, but is that... Yeah.
To do other places, I've got to do some steeping of myself in it.
New York, I kind of know.
And I...
It isn't knowing the streets, but it's knowing the attitudes and knowing the subtext, you know.
But to do it elsewhere... So I had to talk to a lot of people in Branson and kind of get a feeling for it.
And even so, there's a thing...
I didn't realize at first, and then I realized that I was going to have to write the guy's songs.
Some of those lyrics are funny, I have to say.
Do you have tunes in mind when you're doing that, by the way?
Tone deaf doesn't begin to describe me.
There's a line, let me just interrupt for a second, in John Gregory Dunn's new novel.
where one of the guys says, have you ever noticed that every Emily Dickinson poem can be sung to the tune of The Yellow Rose of Texas?
And he gives an example, and son of a gun, if it isn't, it's... That's wonderful.
It's a great line.
That's great.
And you try it, you know, and they give an example.
It's hilarious.
It's true, you know.
Well, the thing is, I didn't know, but...
Somebody at Warner's has a friend or an ex-husband or something who is a musician in Nashville who has done a singer-songwriter.
And so he put two of them to music and got a bunch of the guys and they went into a recording studio on a weekend and did demos of two of the songs.
And they're...
They sound terrific.
That's funny.
Yeah.
He made a couple changes in the lyrics as he went.
And the changes he made usually for his own melody purposes.
But there was one... There was one in...
In particular, though, where he made a change and I realized I still hadn't got it quite right.
Because I had written in one song that I can't find a sweetie no matter how I try.
And he changed it to I can't find a woman no matter how I try.
Oh, of course.
There are no euphemisms in the country.
That's a good line.
When you went to Bretton, did you have an idea of what the plot was?
Or was it still kind of prickle?
Once I found the guy, I knew what the plot was.
When I first went there, no.
I was sort of swimming in the idea of it.
By the time I went back the second time, I knew what it was so that
The people I talked to and everything, I saw them in terms of him, you know, and how if he were Mickey Gilly, what would he say in that?
How would he react and everything?
And so, you know, not that he is Mickey Gilly or Willie Nelson or anyone else in particular.
I wanted him to be some...
some self-aware part of all of them.
Now, as I understand, you're comfortable on both coasts, and I don't mean just geographically, of course.
You've worked in... Well, I don't know that anybody's comfortable in Los Angeles.
But, I mean, you've certainly worked with some success out there.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, you can wear multiple hats, I guess, is what I'm driving at.
I don't know how many people can switch that successfully from one medium to the next.
What's the trick?
I think that I've always thought visually anyway.
I think the books tend to see the scenes as they go anyway.
And I've also always kind of propelled the characters with dialogue.
I'm sorry, with what?
The character's what?
With dialogue.
Okay, I'm sorry.
Yeah, and those are the two things, because really a screenplay is just, you know, a user's manual.
You know, you take all these pieces and take the user's manual, and if you do everything that it says, at the end you'll have a bicycle.
Clearly you don't have an overpowering ego either, because to make a screenplay, I mean, you realize that it's not going to be entirely your work either.
Not at all.
I'm wrong to say not at all, but not at all autonomous, no.
You don't have the same sense of proprietorship, shall we say, that you would have with a novel.
No, you can't.
You can't.
There's so many other people involved, there's so many other elements involved, and...
I know years ago, somebody said wanting to be a screenwriter was like wanting to be co-pilot.
And there is something of that there, but I have watched directors at work, and I know that A, I have the wrong temperament for it, and B, it's a terrible job.
Maybe a fifth of their time is spent in the fun thing of sitting there next to the camera and saying, action cut, you know?
before that starts, they have a whole long period of time of having to schmooze producers and actors and me and the set decorator and the costume designer.
And then when the goddamn thing is finished, they have to spend another, I mean, finish shooting.
They have to spend another three or four months or, in the grifter's case, well, Stephen was delaying it in Stephen Frears because...
The company wanted to enter it into Cannes, and Stephen refused.
He really didn't want it in Cannes.
He said, I've managed to keep art out of it up to this point.
I'm not going to let them put it in now.
So he stalled the post-production until June, when it was too late.
But still, he spent...